Throughout the book, The Catcher in the Rye, the author, J.D. Salinger, expresses his own voice and experiences through the characters and events he creates.  He shares his past through figures such as D.B. and his views with Holden, and his motives are underlying themes throughout the book.  Though there are a very large amount of relations between Salinger and his work, there are some very important similarities which must be discussed.
While many fictional books offer characters loosely based on historical figures, in The Catcher in the Rye, Salinger writes Holden Caulfield as a character greatly inspired by his own life. Many parallels between the two can be drawn ranging from small details to large events. From the first few chapters we know that Holden is growing up in New York. He’s quite familiar with the ins and outs of the place, and demonstrates his knowledge by saying that “money really talks” (p. 69) and he shows his familiarity with the place after he leaves Pencey and needs to live on his own. J.D. Salinger, too, had grown up in New York, and most likely wrote the book as having a setting in New York as a way to make Holden similar to himself. As well, we can infer that Holden comes from a fairly well-off family when he explains that he had gone to many private schools and that his dad was a lawyer. He says that he kept getting kicked out of the schools because he was “flunking four subjects and not applying myself at all.” (p. 4) Although Salinger may not have been flunking most of his subjects, it is apparent that for him, too, academics were not a high priority. Similar to how Holden didn’t try to apply himself at school, Salinger didn’t apply himself very well at a law school, and ended up dropping out. However, these small details are not the only similarities between Salinger’s life and his book. Certain events that occur in the book may have been inspired directly from Salinger’s own life.
A little over half way through the book, with little provocation, Holden volunteers a story of his brother’s involvement in World War II. In The Catcher In The Rye, Holden says that his brother, D.B. Caulfield had been drafted to the army and sent out on D-Day, “He was in the war, too–he landed on D-Day and all…” (p. 140) This exact event happened to J.D. Salinger. It’s possible that Salinger may have added this part of the book in, as well as D.B. to express his feelings after the war and what he had seen. While it could be possible that J.D. even gave D.B. a name with initials similar to his, much stronger connections can be found. As stated previously, this section of the book may very likely be Salinger’s way of letting free his emotions dealing with the war. In the book, Holden exclaims that D.B. would “come home on furlough and all, all he did was lie on his bed, practically. He hardly ever even came in the living room.” (p. 140) From the documentary, Salinger, it is learned that after the war Salinger had in fact suffered from mild PTSD from the sights he saw. Both the book and the documentary exclaim that Salinger (D.B.) was never injured, but still suffered from the experience. D.B. can also be compared to Salinger with their shared interest in writing, particularly about events inspired by the war.
The final and arguably most accurate and important connection between Salinger’s life and the book he created is a similarity between Holden and Salinger. The two share a great interest, of which is a definite theme throughout the book, being the desire for the preservation of innocence. Throughout the book, Holden seems to be less grown up than most of the people around him. He seems to dislike many people his age or older, saying that they are all phonies. Kids on the other hand, he likes them a lot due to just how uncorrupted and innocent they are. When Holden is depressed, seeing the innocence of a kid generally makes him feel better, as seen when Holden is depressed before meeting up with Sally, but he sees a child singing “If a body catch a body coming through the rye.” and it made him “feel better. It made me feel not so depressed anymore.” (p. 115) As well, the book even derives its title from a single passage in the book where Holden is talking to Phoebe about what he wishes he could do. “"Anyway, I keep picturing all these little kids playing some game in this big field of rye and all. Thousands of little kids, and nobody's around--nobody big, I mean--except me. And I'm standing on the edge of some crazy cliff. What I have to do, I have to catch everybody if they start to go over the cliff--I mean if they're running and they don't look where they're going I have to come out from somewhere and catch them. That's all I'd do all day. I'd just be the catcher in the rye and all. I know it's crazy, but that's the only thing I'd really like to be. I know it's crazy” (p. 173) In this passage, the field of rye likely represents the confusion and lack of foresight that comes with childhood, running around without a cause but simply because you can. The cliff then represents the crossing-over to adulthood, and there being no turning back once you’ve started falling. What Holden wishes to do is to save children from becoming adults, and with that losing their innocence. Although Salinger never himself went to a field of rye and stopped children from falling off a cliff, he still in many ways tried to preserve innocence. He seemed drawn to the innocence that came with the naivete of childhood. He would constantly fall in love with the simplicity of young girls, and their seeming bliss in the world. However, once that girl became a woman, that innocence was gone. In one instance, Salinger married and had a baby with a young girl he fell in love with. However, after she gave birth and became a mother, he saw just how much of an adult she had become, he later divorced seeing that he had caused a loss of innocence.
By the end of the book, however, Holden has realised that the transition into adulthood is inevitable. He finally realises this when he is walking with Phoebe and she wants to go on the carousel. Not only does he say he is too big and passes riding himself, but he also observes the behaviour of the kids riding the carousel and makes an interesting comment. He sees that when the kids are on the carousel they keep trying to grab for the gold ring. Although it was somewhat dangerous and Phoebe could have fallen, he makes sure not to tell her to stop. “All the kids kept trying to grab for the gold ring, and so was old Phoebe, and I was sort of afraid she’d fall of the goddam horse, but I didn’t say anything or do anything. The thing with kids is, if they want to grab for the gold ring, you have to let them do it, and no say anything. If they fall off, the fall off, but it’s bad if you say anything to them.” (p. 211) Interestingly enough, Salinger chooses to mention the idea of the kids falling off something, similar to falling off a cliff to adulthood. However, Holden realises, and in turn Salinger had also realised that no one would stay a child or stay innocent forever, and there’s no stopping it from happening. It is best to let the world play its course and not interfere. Towards the later end of his life, Salinger adopted many buddhist values and practices. One of the main practices being contributing to the world by leaving it alone. A similar view is expressed in this ending passage to the book, and in many ways could have been a moment of self discovery for Salinger.
Based on what was written, it is highly likely that Salinger shared a deep connection with The Catcher in the Rye and many of the characters and events within.  He showed his emotions and values through different characters, and allowed for self discovery in many key events in the book.  One of the reasons the book reverberates so greatly with so many people is likely due to Salingers deep mental link with his work.  It is unlikely that many other artists will ever achieve such a profound connection with what they create, but to achieve such a level of connection is sure to result in another powerful piece of art.
